ComBat is an R package for removing batch effects from data.
This is a python version that matches the output from the ComBat function
in SVA (http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/sva.html).
This code is completely copied from the ComBat function in that package.


Compare
=======

To test, run this R code (requires sva and bladderbatch from bioconductor):

```Shell

Rscript R-combat.R

```

Then, from the same directory, run

```Shell

python combat.py

```

you can then run this python code to see the differences:

```Python
import pandas as pa
p = pa.read_table('py-batch.txt', index_col=0)
r = pa.read_table('r-batch.txt', index_col=0)

print (p - r).max().max()
```
This outputs 3.9423421307e-05 on my machine. Indicating that
that is the largest difference between the 22,283*57 values generated by the
R version and those generated in this version.

Performance
===========
In the example above, the combat function runs in < 1 second in python
and about 15 seconds in R.

On an identical dataset, of 30K rows * 190 samples, this python version finishes in 10.008s
as measured by unix `time`.
The R version takes 4m0.681s with output identical to 3 decimal places. This is a speed-up
of about *24x.*

The speed improvement seems to be larger for larger datasets.

Function
========

The python version is usable as a module, the function has the signature:

```Python

   combat(dat, batch, mod, numCovs=None)

```

which is the same as the R function except the non-parametric version is not supported.

 + dat is the expression/methylation data.
 + batch is a list containing the batch variable
 + mod is the model matrix (can use patsy for this from python)
 + numCovs is a list like ["age", "height"], that gives the column name or number
   of numeric variables in batch (otherwise they will be converted to factors).

Read
====

    Johnson WE, Rabinovic A, Li C (2007). Adjusting batch effects in microarray
    expression data using Empirical Bayes methods. Biostatistics 8:118-127.  

    Jeffrey T. Leek, W. Evan Johnson, Hilary S. Parker, Andrew E. Jaffe
    and John D. Storey (). sva: Surrogate Variable Analysis. R package
    version 3.4.0.

